3. Services and System Development
a) Software Developer Responsibilities
(i) General. In consideration of the fees described in Section 4, Software Developer will provide
the HPARC ongoing software development and consulting services in the following areas
(collectively, the “Services”): The Software Developer will develop, maintain, customize,
distribute and manage the system configuration; provide 24-hour emergency response; test;
provide Second Level Support; and provide user and technical documentation for the
Telecommunication Billing and HPARC Care System (the “System”). In order to perform the
Services, the HPARC authorizes the Software Developer to build a team of personnel
approximating the labor chart set forth in Exhibit A as soon as reasonable.
(ii) Reports. Software Developer shall deliver to HPARC reports in the format set forth on
Exhibit C on a weekly basis or as specified by HPARC’s project manager, which shall contain a
description of the current status of the System, the personnel and their skill category working
on the System, the progress towards assigned HPARC objectives and the estimated progress to
be made in the next week. Software Developer shall meet with the HPARC monthly at a
mutually agreed-upon location, or more often if requested by HPARC, to discuss and report on
the progress on the Services and the status of the System. Some of these meetings may happen
using on-line technology.  
(iii) Staffing Resources and Guarantee. HPARC reserves the right to approve all staffing
decisions. Resources will be applied to HPARC projects by the mutual agreement of the parties
and such resources shall not be reassigned without the prior written approval of the HPARC.
HPARC reserves the right to have any of Software Developer’s personnel removed from
HPARC’s projects for any reason that HPARC deems necessary for quality and performance.
Resources shall be applied exclusively to HPARC projects, and will not be shared with other
projects that Software Developer may support. Software Developer agrees that the failure to
maintain the required staffing levels would be detrimental to the success of HPARC’s projects.
(iv) Insurance. Software Developer shall provide adequate medical and accident insurance for
all consultants supplied by Software Developer, whether working at the Software Developer’s
site or working internationally on HPARC’s projects. Adequate insurance shall also be carried by
Software Developer to protect HPARC-provided facilities, equipment and intellectual property
present on the Software Developer’s site.
 b) HPARC Responsibilities

(i) General. Unless otherwise agreed, HPARC shall develop the business designs for the core
product and for customization; and provide Software Developer with access to HPARC’s
network if required. HPARC shall assist integration testing and configuration management
during the Software Developer’s training period. This training period shall not exceed six (6)
months from the date of this Agreement.
(ii) Training. HPARC shall provide Software Developer adequate training on HPARC’s systems
and each HPARC specific configuration in order to facilitate the transfer of all technical and
product knowledge from Software Developer to HPARC.

4. Fees and Payment
a) Fees. The overall fee for this assignment is a lumpsum amount of -
_____________________, ($________). HPARC is a 501c(3), non-profit corporation so no taxes
are to be invoiced.
b) Invoices. Software Developer shall provide HPARC, on a monthly basis, an invoice
based upon a percent complete of each development task and deliverables.
c) Travel Expense Reimbursement. Billings for Software Developer’s travel expenses must
be generated along with the labor and miscellaneous expenses monthly billings. All bills must
be submitted with adequate documentation, including the prescribed travel authorization form,
the travel expense report form, original receipts, reason for travel, and the HPARC’s project
manager’s written approval. Travel per diem rates will be determined by the HPARC’s project
manager depending on the destination. HPARC must approve all travel and miscellaneous
expenses in advance.
d) Payments. HPARC shall pay all undisputed invoices within thirty (30) days of the receipt
of such invoice. All payments shall be made by HPARC to Software Developer in U.S. Dollars. 

5. Change of Scope. At any time during the term of this Agreement, HPARC may require Software
Developer to provide additional or reduced services as set forth below.
a) Submission of Request. HPARC shall submit to Software Developer in writing all
requests by HPARC for any such modification of services which alters, amends, enhances, or
adds to the services and/or time and/or place of performance (hereinafter referred to as
“Modification/Change Request” or “Request”. HPARC will provide thirty (30) days’ notice in the
event of reduction in services.
b) Performance. Upon such authorization by HPARC of the Modification/Change Request,
Software Developer will implement such Request immediately. Software Developer shall not
perform any services in advance of written authorization from HPARC.
c) Binding Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement, each Modification/Change
Request duly authorized in writing by HPARC and agreed to by Software Developer shall be
deemed incorporated into and part of this Agreement, and each such Request shall constitute a formal amendment to this Agreement, adjusting fees and services as finally agreed upon for each authorized Modification/Change Request. In no event shall the services be deemed altered, amended, enhanced, reduced, or otherwise modified except through written
authorization by HPARC of a Modification/Change Request and acceptance by Software
Developer, all in accordance with this Section 5.

9. Deliverables
a) Completion or Termination. Software Developer shall upon completion or termination
of this Agreement, or upon demand by the HPARC, for whatever cause and without regard to
whether the System has been completed, promptly return to the HPARC any and all proprietary
information together with any copies or reproductions thereof and destroy all material in its
computers and other electronic files. Software Developer shall at such time provide the HPARC
with a certificate signed by an officer of the Software Developer certifying that all such
proprietary information has been returned to the HPARC or destroyed. Software Developer
agrees to ensure that all HPARC data will be erased from all forms of magnetic and electronic
media using a method which ensures that it can not be recovered. Software Developer shall
state in writing the method of data destruction and the date completed.
b) Ownership Notice. All work performed by the Software Developer under this
Agreement shall contain the following copyright notice: “[HPARC] [year]. All Rights Reserved”
and the following proprietary notice: “The information contained herein is proprietary [HPARC]
and shall not be reproduced, copied in whole or in part, adapted, modified, or disseminated
without the express prior written consent of [HPARC].” These notices shall appear in human
readable form on labels attached to containers for computer disks, tapes or similar media and
at the beginning of all human readable works such as design documents, manuals, etc. The
notices shall appear in human readable form at the beginning of all machine readable
documents.
c) Cooperation by Software Developer. Should HPARC or any of its agents or
representatives seek to obtain letters, patent, trademarks or copyrights in any country of the
world on all or part of the System, Software Developer agrees to cooperate fully without
compensation in providing information, completing forms, performing actions and obtaining
the necessary signatures or assignments required to obtain such letters, patent, trademarks or
copyrights. In the event HPARC shall be unable for any reason to obtain Software Developer’s
signature on any document necessary for any purpose set forth in the foregoing sentence,
Software Developer hereby irrevocably designates and appoints each of HPARC and its dulyauthorized officers and agents as Software Developer’s agent and Software Developer’s
attorney-in-fact to act for and in Software Developer’s behalf and stead to execute and file any
such document and to do all other lawfully permitted acts to further any such purpose with the
same force and effect as if executed and delivered by Software Developer.
d) Software Developer’s Proprietary Software Programs. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Subsections 9a) and 9b) above, it is understood and agreed that Software Developer may, in
its sole discretion, use its proprietary software programs in providing Services. If Software Developer uses any such proprietary software programs and so notifies HPARC, HPARC shall not
market or in any way use such software programs as independent “stand-alone” programs
without the express written consent of Software Developer, and HPARC shall not acquire any
proprietary rights to such programs.


19.	Interpretation
19.1	In this Agreement, a reference to a statute or statutory provision includes a reference to: 
(a)	that statute or statutory provision as modified, consolidated and/or re-enacted from time to time; and
(b)	any subordinate legislation made under that statute or statutory provision.
19.2	The Clause headings do not affect the interpretation of this Agreement.
19.3	References in this Agreement to "calendar months" are to [the 12 named periods (January, February and so on) into which a year is divided].
19.4	In this Agreement, general words shall not be given a restrictive interpretation by reason of being preceded or followed by words indicating a particular class of acts, matters or things.